## First blog post

### What do you think being a data scientist is about? 

As the abilities of our computers continue to advance, so to does the amount of data we can amass and analyze. With that comes the need to efficiently and effectively manage these data. Data is the lifeblood of any scientific study, and by extension, the lifeblood of the decisions a functioning society needs to continue moving forward; even the most thoughtfully designed, carefully executed study can be crippled by subpar data. To this end, we need folks with expertise in keeping our ever-growing, increasingly complex datasets from becoming unwieldy. These folks are data scientists.<br>

###  What do you see as the major duties and/or knowledge areas?
The basic duty of a data scientist is, as the name implies, interacting with datasets. This can involve the general curation/organization of data, "cleaning" and other accuracy-checking measures, and general exploration of data for certain patterns/trends. Depending on the purpose of a particular dataset, further duties can include general data presentation (e.g., infographics and interactive dashboards), or preparation of data for more traditional statistical analysis.<br>

Increasingly large datasets make it physically impossible for a human to manually accomplish the above. Further, manual human activity is always fraught with error. As such, computer assistance is needed in the above duties. A data scientist must be good with computers; an ability to write accurate, efficient programs, replete with various error-checking mechanisms, is paramount. Some affinity for mathematical/statistical thinking is also helpful. Outside of these general academic skills, a data scientist often interacts with a diverse suite of people. The data scientist may interact with a scientist who is much more technically knowledgeable than they are regarding the underpinnings of a particular dataset. Conversely, they may interact with a graphic designer who has no technical knowledge regarding a dataset, but knows the best way to visualize it. Strong communicative abilities, knowing what questions to ask, and a touch of patience are all beneficial abilities for the data scientist to possess.<br>

###   What differences/similarities do you see between data scientists and statisticians?

Data scientists and statisticians both deal with data. A pure statistician determines *how* we know what we know: how one can generate a point estimate, how representative that estimate is of a general population, how to compare point estimates to make inferences about differing populations, and how confident one can be in those inferences. A pure data scientist is concerned with the data necessary for the statistician to answer the above questions. They are incredibly complimentary; the data scientist ensures the curation of quality data, and the statistician pulls as much information as possible from that data.<br>

In practice, there is considerable overlap. Statisticians often dabble in data science to organize datasets and investigate potential analyses. Data scientists often conduct statistical analyses to investigate larger patterns within a dataset. To me, the line can be very blurry. I think this is a good thing, as a statistician becomes better with some data science skills, and vice versa.

### How do you view yourself in relation to these two areas?

I view myself as an "applied statistical analyst." I am an entomologist by training, and through my studies, I developed an interest in statistics. I respect the theoretical foundation of the statistical analyses I conduct, but I certainly do not possess the skillset to challenge these foundations/develop new ones. I am happy to leave that to the statistician. Through my studies, I also developed an appreciation for data collection and management. While my "data management" was often clumsy, inefficient if/then Excel formulas buried in spreadsheets, I certainly saw the benefit in having a computer "check behind me" when it came to keeping things organized. I am happy to leave the hardcore, 1,000,000+ observation dataset activities to the data scientist, and have an incredible amount of respect for the folks with the abilities to tackle such impressive feats. To that end, I think I occupy a middle ground. My current position necessitates I do some statistical analyses, but nothing overly exotic. Similarly, I need to work with datasets (with accuracy/data integrity being of utmost importance given my role in regulatory science), but nothing overly impressive in size. While I will never consider myself a "statistician" or "data scientist," I am certainly looking forward to this class, and am excited to pick up some data science skills.
