The Coolest Thing I Learned About R
================
Damon D’Ambrosio
2023-06-29

## Response to prompt

I have very much enjoyed learning about R programming this semester. As
I’ve mentioned in a prior post, I had some “self-taught” exposure to R
prior to this class. Through the course however, I learned that many of
the “limitations” I assumed R had as a statistical analysis tool were
based on my limited knowledge of the language; not on the language
itself.

It is difficult to nail down what I would consider the “coolest” thing
I’ve learned. I used `ggplot2` in graduate school prior to this course
and made cool figures (albeit with really clumsy code, and no concept of
the “grammar of graphics”), but learning how to “really” use `ggplot2`
has been pretty neat. I knew a little bit about the various R objects,
but couldn’t tell you why one would use a dataframe versus a matrix, or
why a vector and list were different.

The one thing that was absolutely brand new to me was function writing;
while I knew functions existed, I had no idea how to write them. I think
learning how to write functions, in the context of the many ways to
create/manipulate R objects and using “helper” functions (along with
other cool things like `lapply`), has been the coolest thing I’ve
learned overall.

## Example

Here is a silly example of a most of that stuff in action:

``` r
silly.function.helper <- function(x){
  colors <- palette(rainbow(6))
  adjective <- sample(nrow(codename::adjectives), x, replace = TRUE)
  animal <- sample(nrow(codename::animals),x, replace = TRUE)
  
  paste0("The ", sample(colors,1), " ", animals[sample(animal,1), ], " is ", adjectives[sample(adjective,1), ])
}

random.sentences <- function(x){
  if(!is.numeric(x)){
    stop("Expecting numeric input!")
  }
  sentence.list <- lapply(x, silly.function.helper)
  return(sentence.list)
}
```

The `random.sentences` function above takes advantage of some
pre-populated dataframes in the `codename` package to create random
sentences describing a random animal of one of six possible colors.
There is a bunch of excess and likely unnecessesary “extra”
randomization that occurs throughout: the helper function takes a
numeric value `x`, generates a sample of adjectives and animals of size
`x`, then creates a sentence with a single value randomly subsampled
from each of these. `random.sentences` will then produce a list of
random sentences, with a length equal to `x`.

``` r
library(codename)
x <- 1:5
random.sentences(x)
```

    ## [[1]]
    ## [1] "The green alpaca is awkward"
    ## 
    ## [[2]]
    ## [1] "The magenta aardwolf is scaly"
    ## 
    ## [[3]]
    ## [1] "The red salamander is lumbering"
    ## 
    ## [[4]]
    ## [1] "The yellow cardinal is worthless"
    ## 
    ## [[5]]
    ## [1] "The cyan gerbil is minty"

Running the function again with an identical `x` will generate different
sentences within its list:

``` r
random.sentences(x)
```

    ## [[1]]
    ## [1] "The green canidae is academic"
    ## 
    ## [[2]]
    ## [1] "The blue ant is grotesque"
    ## 
    ## [[3]]
    ## [1] "The yellow condor is dutiful"
    ## 
    ## [[4]]
    ## [1] "The green xenarthra is defenseless"
    ## 
    ## [[5]]
    ## [1] "The green stork is treasured"

However, one can still set the seed to make outcomes somewhat
reproducible:

``` r
#Set seed and generate 3 sentences
set.seed(15)
a <- random.sentences(1:3)

#Reset seed and see if the same 3 sentences appear
set.seed(15)
b <- random.sentences(1:3)

#Print for visual confirmation
print(a)
```

    ## [[1]]
    ## [1] "The yellow sailfish is common"
    ## 
    ## [[2]]
    ## [1] "The cyan whitefish is digital"
    ## 
    ## [[3]]
    ## [1] "The green mastodon is speedy"

``` r
print(b)
```

    ## [[1]]
    ## [1] "The yellow sailfish is common"
    ## 
    ## [[2]]
    ## [1] "The cyan whitefish is digital"
    ## 
    ## [[3]]
    ## [1] "The green mastodon is speedy"

``` r
#Check for equality with setequal()
setequal(a,b)
```

    ## [1] TRUE

Is this function useful for anything? Probably not. However, I’ve very
much enjoyed learning about function writing, specifically thinking
about helpers, using `lapply`, and manipulationg R objects, and hope the
above was a nice demonstration of that.
