Project 1
================
Damon D’Ambrosio
2023-06-25

# Project 1

## What I did

For my project, I chose to revisit an aspect of my childhood and utilize
the Pokemon data API, [PokeAPI](https://pokeapi.co/). Even as a kid, I
was always interested in some of the “data” associated with the Pokemon
games, even if it was a real superficial interest (e.g., “this Pokemon
is 7 inches taller than me!”). Aside from tidbits like Pokemon height
and weight, there is a good amount of data related to the actual
gameplay, namely each Pokemon’s “base stats,” which determines how well
they will do in battle, which is the overall point of the game.

Now that I’m a bit older and capable of analysis of some sort, I thought
it was interesting to actually take a good look at some of this. For
this project, I did a little research on how the Pokemon games have
changed since I was a kid, and discovered a big modification to the base
stats of each original Pokemon to help with gameplay balance. Exploring
this change further and deriving some variables to understand what
impact this stat change had on each individual Pokemon was the most
interesting part of this project for me.

## Function-specific challenges

Going into the project, I had some ideas as to the type of data I wanted
to query from the API, and how I might want to explore it. The first
concern was figuring out exactly how to connect to and query the API.
Fortunately, that was a bit was a little easier than expected. Although
it took some trial and error, I was able to figure out the method by
which to extract the desired information. From there, I did have to
refresh my knowledge a bit on how to extract specific elements from
various R objects; prior to this course (i.e., when I was “self-taught”
in R), I had grown into a habit of always using the
`dataframe$column.name` notation for finding things, all the while being
blind to the exact structure of the various R objects. I have found the
notations we have learned (e.g., `dataframe[1]`) to be a lot more
efficient, especially when column names get long, and offer a lot more
flexibility when writing functions. In all, the most challenging
function to write was `pokemon.lookup`.

I wrote `pokemon.lookup` with the intention of feeding it to `lapply` to
generate a report with the information for multiple Pokemon. During that
process, I thought of the idea for the `pokemon.vector` function. For
whatever reason (perhaps because I had thought about it a lot in
advance), `pokemon.vector` was the easiest and most straightforward
function to write.

The `gen1.correction` function was a litte less straightforward. I knew
I had to implement type changes and add in the Generation I “Special”
stat to each Pokemon’s record given the context of the exploratory
analysis I wanted to do. Unfortunately, I could not find this “Special”
stat within the API. As such, I ended up creating it as a vector within
the function. The API *does* have some information concerning Pokemon
typing in prior generations. I initially tried to figure out a way to
access this information and use some conditional logic to automate this
process, but I never got a good feel of how to do this in an efficient
manner that didn’t involve doubling the number of calls to the API and
necessitating very complex logic statements. As such, this function is
overall a little more “hard-coded” than I would like it to be.

The `pokemon.batch.report` function came together pretty smoothly, as I
had verified ahead of time that `pokemon.lookup` and `lapply` would play
together nicely; finishing up this wrapper function was a matter of
adding in some conditional logic to incorporate `pokemon.vector` and
`gen1.correction`. I did hit a couple of snags figuring out how to pass
`...` arguments in the `pokemon.batch.report` call to its helper
functions, but was able to resolve this after reviewing the lectures
again.

## What I would do differently next time

I’m overall happy with how my approach went, but could definitely think
of a few things I would do differently on a similar project:

The first thing is establishing a better understanding of exactly what
information is available in a particular API before planning out an
analysis. I had committed to wanting to explore the Generation I
“Special” stat almost immediately upon reading the .pdf for the project
and seeing “Pokemon” as an option, only to find partway through my
workflow that such data technically did not exist in the API. Although I
was able to find a workaround, I will in the future explore the API
first.

The second thing is being better with Git and Github. I wanted to test
some things in the early going, but ended up pushing an improperly named
.md file and overall making a mess. Although I improved as I continued
to pull, commit, and push, I still was messier than I would have liked.
This includes the end of the project, where I referred to something as a
“final” commit, then decided mere minutes later that I didn’t like how a
figure looked. Lesson learned- never refer to a commit as “final.” My
apologies to Dr. Osborne for having several more “commits” than I really
needed to. Getting more and more comfortable with Git and Github is
still a work in progress for me, but I feel I’m headed in the right
direction.

The final thing I would do differently, which I alluded to earlier in
this post, would be making functions like `gen1.correction` with less
hard coding. It worked out okay in this particular instance, but if I
were to revisit this function in the future, I would like to figure out
a way to better “automate” it through querying the API for some of the
information that is currently coded into it. Instead of being a function
that specifically “corrects” for Generation I, I would envision it as a
function that could “correct” for any Generation based on user input,
and be coded in a way to continually access the latest information
available in PokeAPI.

## Conclusion and links

Even with some of the challenges, I overall enjoyed seeing this come
together, and feel I learned a lot about R, Rmarkdown, and Github in the
process. Links to the project page and repo are below:

- [Project page](https://dadambro.github.io/project-1/)
- [Repo](https://github.com/dadambro/project-1)
